Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and Bill Vernon.
Marion Zimmer Bradley has had a long and successful career as a writer of science fiction and fantasy.
She began publishing professionally in 1953, some 30 years ago, but she had been writing long before that even.
Well, I'm told that I started dictating poems to my mother before I could print,
but it's true that I've been writing for school papers and things.
I started making up stories, poems, and songs since, well, it was well before I entered school.
But I didn't start writing with any connected ambition until I was about 12 or 13.
Like many other present-day science fiction authors,
Bradley was introduced to the field through the pulp magazines in the golden age of science fiction.
Well, when I was a child, I thought that if I wanted to grow up and be a writer,
I would probably write historical fiction because that was what I liked best at that time.
Although I always loved things like writer Haggard,
but they were in such old books that I decided they weren't being published anymore.
Then when I discovered the pulp magazines, Astounding, Thrilling Wonder, that sort of thing,
and I saw the fan magazines in the back, the fanzines and the letters from fans,
I thought, my goodness, there are other people who like this sort of thing.
And all of a sudden, I realized not only that I wanted to write for a living,
but that I wanted to write science fiction and fantasy.
Bradley is high on the value of science fiction and believes it can be of benefit to anyone.
People are always asking me why I write science fiction when there are so many other things
or why I'm not into mainstream fiction.
And I have written mainstream novels.
But my feeling is that science fiction is a very, and fantasy, of course,
is a very valuable genre because it forces people to think.
You can't just, oh, I suppose you can in the slam-bang action stuff.
But even in those, there is a residue of what if the world were different than it is now?
People in our society and in our schools are supposed to keep tight to reality
and not imagine things and don't be so imaginative.
And I think imagination is the one great thing that distinguishes us from the beasts.
And science fiction is a very valuable corrective to modern education
because it makes people think and it forces them to stretch their imaginations,
which gets sort of atrophied in the average school.
Much of Bradley's work deals with parapsychology, telepathy, ESP,
things having to do with the occult.
We ask her why these topics interested her so much.
Well, possibly because, as I said before, I began my reading with such people as Ryder Haggard,
Merritt, Andrew Lang, Yeats, the Dunsany people, the serious fantasy writers,
and they, of course, were all roughly connected, which I found out later,
to the Golden Dawn Order, the magical order in England.
Also, there was a lot of, there's a lot of history.
Fantasy sort of comes out of occultism, as it were,
what's now called the neo-pagan religions, but, of course, they didn't exist at that time.
So I thought I was the only person interested in these things.
And when I got into Haggard, Mundy, people like that,
I realized this is, this is what I was looking for.
There are a lot of people, I think, who look in science fiction and fantasy
for validation of the fact that there are other things in life
than, than you might say, the mundane round and materialism.
And those of us who can't get into conventional religion,
which I've never been able to do for various and sundry reasons,
we use that, I think, as a way of looking for what was real in religion
behind the dogma and behind the, all the nonsense and hellfire.
Bradley has published around 50 novels so far,
in addition to numerous short stories, essays, and various other literary projects.
Not all of her novels have been science fiction or fantasy.
Most of the ones that are concern the planet Darkover,
her most popular creation.
There are some 15 novels in the Darkover series presently,
and the list is still growing.
Next time, we'll talk to Bradley about her Darkover series.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show,
so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon.
And Daryl Lane.
Among the most popular of science fiction stories
would have to be the Darkover stories of Marion Zimmer Bradley.
The series would have to be considered as one of the most enduring, too.
So far, it numbers some 15 novels and two collections of short stories,
and more novels are on the way.
Darkover is a planet.
It circles a red sun, which gives it a rich, dusky atmosphere.
The highest culture on Darkover consists of descendants of humans
who crash-landed on the planet many centuries before.
And they've developed telepathic powers.
Their whole culture is based on the use of these mental powers,
rather than on technology.
Humans from Earth eventually rediscover Darkover,
and there is a conflict between the two cultures.
The technological emphasis of Earth and its empire
versus the slower, provincial, almost futile society of the Darkoverans,
which is based on telepathy.
Even though the novels and stories of Darkover are related,
Bradley did not consider them as a series
when she started writing about Darkover.
I started trying to do that around the time I wrote Forbidden Tower.
Originally, no.
I had a feeling, and other writers told me rather cynically,
that the life of a paperback book was about five or six months,
that nobody, and so I assumed, I realized it was not safe to assume
that anyone who read any of my books had ever read a previous book
or would ever read another book by me.
So I worked very hard to make each book stand on its own feet
and not assume any knowledge of previous books.
We asked her if she considered each Darkover story
as a separate creation and not part of a consistent whole.
That's right.
I try very hard to make each book have its own internal consistency and logic,
but if the books don't jibe with one another,
then the readers are just going to have to use their own imagination
to fill in the gaps.
She explains why she writes so often about Darkover.
Well, it started originally from laziness.
I was going to college, putting myself through college,
and then later she was supporting a sick husband
and a couple of children when I married for the second time,
and my husband was quite ill and couldn't work much,
and the babies were still in diapers,
and it was the only job I could take that would let me stay home
and look after them,
because, well, it was really too ill even to cope with that.
So I figured if I could sell books while I was putting myself through college,
I could certainly do it while I was home looking after the kids.
And so I started writing,
and when you have a nice setting and background,
which is as fully worked out as Darkover was for me,
well, you tend to go back to it
rather than trying to invent a whole new world,
partly because it's easier
and partly because you realize you haven't...
The books are tailored to...
In those days, the books were tailored
to such close commercial restrictions about length and so forth
that I realized every time that I'd had to cut out so much
from my own thinking about the book
that what I'd cut out would make a sizable new book,
and it was a lot simpler.
I figured that since people would read lots of books about Tarzan
or Perry Mason or Nero Wolfe or whatever,
people evidently liked reading about stories with the same background.
It was easier to write them
than to invent a whole new universe for each book.
That is, as I say, at the beginning, it was laziness.
Then later, I wanted to give up the whole thing
because I thought people must be getting tired of it.
And I told Don Wollheim this, and he said,
Oh, no, people are always asking
when is there going to be another book about Darkover?
And so I decided, good heavens, if it really is a series,
maybe I ought to start thinking of it as a series
and take it seriously that way.
The first Darkover novel, The Sword of Aldonis,
was published in 1962.
The latest, Hawk Mistress, was released recently in paperback.
Bradley has signed a contract for two more Darkover novels,
so the series will be growing in the coming years.
Science fiction readers will be delighted at that news.
We'll continue our discussion with Marion Zimmer Bradley next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show,
so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And Bill Vernon.
Marion Zimmer Bradley's Darkover stories are based on one overall conflict,
the technological might of Earth versus the telepathic powers of the inhabitants of Darkover.
The planet Darkover, circling a blood-red sun, contains valuable crystals which greatly magnify and concentrate telepathic ability.
These crystals are the basis of the Darkover civilization.
Earth wants access to the crystals, and it wants Darkover as part of its interstellar empire.
But the Darkover's resist.
The conflict never really breaks into a full-scale interplanetary war,
but the tension leads to all sorts of intrigues, skirmishes, and spying activities.
Relying on their mental powers is the Darkover's do.
They've never developed a technology.
In fact, they often seem anti-technological, though Bradley says this is not the case.
I don't think so much anti-technological as thinking that perhaps there are better ways to do things than by technology.
It isn't so much anti-technological as a concept that possibly the same kind of technology does not fit every planet,
just as materialism does not fit every human mind,
that there are different universes for different mental sets, as you said.
I think I'm a very sort of alternative culture person myself,
and from the time I was a child I have never liked the idea that everybody has to fit into the same lockstep
and be, well, they now say be clones.
My daughter calls the ordinary kids at school who never think of anything except football games clones.
Well, I felt that way when I was a youngster,
and so I suppose the idea of leaving open options and choices for everybody
so they can find the kind of lifestyle that suits them best
instead of blamly assuming that everybody has to belong to the same lifestyle.
That was something that I felt very strongly about when I was a kid,
and I feel even more strongly about than I did when I was 15.
Bradley seems to be fairly even-handed in presenting the conflict between Darkover and Earth,
but she also has sympathy for Darkover's position and even seems to admire its way of life.
We asked her if it would be fair to say that she tends to be slightly on the side of non-technological Darkover.
No, I would not. My very life is dependent on technology.
I am myself a diabetic and dependent upon medical preparations,
which are very difficult to get in an anti-techno or a non-technological culture.
It is simply that I do what you call an even-handed job because, well, my husband says it's because I'm a Gemini,
and it's true that I am cursed with seeing two sides of everything.
When I was a kid and reading in school about what a terrible person Benedict Arnold was,
I still realized that to the British he was a hero,
and it suddenly occurred to me that the villain is always,
except for real criminals like mass murderers, rapists, that sort of thing,
almost every, quote, villain, unquote, is just the victim of a political conflict.
He's the hero of the other side.
One thing, though, that Bradley admires in the Darkover society is the compact.
The compact outlaws guns, explosives, or energy weapons of any kind.
Any fighting must be done with swords, knives, bows and arrows, and so forth.
In this day and age with nuclear weapons every place,
I think every human being has to be in sympathy with the compact,
or if they aren't, there's something wrong with their brains.
At least under the compact, if you have only a sword or a knife,
you can do only one person's amount of damage.
I suppose it's my emotional reaction to the fact that when I was 15 years old,
it became possible to wipe out all human life on Earth
if one paranoid politician presses the wrong button.
And I think maybe that's too much power
and would like to see power back in the hands of individuals over their own lives.
I don't like the idea that we are all, you might say,
hostages in a monstrous political and ideological conflict.
I can't believe that God is on one side
and that on the other there is only the devil.
On our next show, we'll discuss one of Bradley's Darkover novels,
The Shattered Chain.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show,
so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon.
And Daryl Lane.
The Shattered Chain is one of the 15 science fiction novels
that presently make up Marion Zimmer Bradley's series about the planet Darkover.
The novel deals with one of the basic problems or dilemmas of the Darkover society,
the position of women.
And in doing that, the book also confronts the same issue in our society today.
It treats the role of women in a sensitive, understanding manner.
The novel follows three women.
Lady Rohana, a noble Darkoven with children.
Jaelle, the leader of a band of free Amazon warrior women.
And Magda, an earth woman who becomes involved with the free Amazons.
The free Amazons are a sisterhood of Darkoven women who have dropped out of normal society.
They order their lives with the principles contained in the Oath of the Free Amazons.
The idea behind the oath is total freedom, both physically and emotionally, from a male-dominated culture.
The oath has been admired by women's liberation readers.
We asked Bradley what the impetus behind it was.
As a matter of fact, it was sort of spontaneous.
I was writing along in the story and I hadn't the slightest idea what was going to happen
until Magda ran into the free Amazons.
And I thought, well, what would they do to her?
They certainly wouldn't kill her because they're peaceful people.
And then it suddenly occurred to me that the penalty for passing yourself off as an Amazon
might be to be forced into actually observing the laws.
And so also it was in a way a literary device to get Magda among them to explore it from the heroine's eye.
But I found myself suddenly just writing down the oath.
I didn't figure it out beforehand.
I just said, now what would this group of people demand of people who came among them
and that sort of just poured out?
Both Magda and Lady Rohana admire the free Amazons.
Magda, in fact, chooses to become one.
But Rohana remains a normal, Darkoven woman.
She stays with her husband and children.
And though she sympathizes with the free Amazon, she speaks for the traditional woman's role.
We asked Bradley if she sympathized with Rohana.
Of course I do, because I lived in a world where these restrictions became part of our lives.
And a lot of, for instance, very liberated women, I would like very much to join them in many ways.
But having taken on responsibilities, my kids are here.
I can't just...
You can't divorce your children.
You can't take back the commitments you've made.
But it's also true that this kind of freedom is not for everybody.
I, for instance, would absolutely love to sail single-handed around the world or climb Mount Everest.
But I had children until I was too old to do so.
And nowadays, there is really no great reason for me to...
No great reason for me to strike out and do this.
I have a great deal of sympathy and admiration for people who can do these things.
But I can't.
Just as I think Rohana had a great deal of admiration for the free Amazons,
her attitude is, well, if I had known about this kind of thing when I was a young girl,
instead of just believing all sorts of lies about them, I probably would have been one too.
But it's too late for that.
And I had another...
You might say that God had meant something else for me.
But Bradley also presents the free Amazons with compassion and understanding.
She tells us why they're important.
I think the free Amazons were created out of my wish to realize that in a society so abnormally restrictive,
there must be some kind of a safety valve that a society would blow to pieces.
So there had to be some kind of an honorable alternative provided in the society for women,
and for that matter for men, who simply could not live under the pressures of that kind of society.
We thought that feminist readers of The Shattered Chain would be pleased at the free Amazons
in the way Bradley treats women in the novel.
But Bradley says that isn't so.
As a matter of fact, the real heavy feminists believe that I'm sort of a pussycat, a Mickey Mouse,
because I don't go far enough in men-hating.
They said I didn't have the courage to go far enough and create a society
where men had actually been eliminated, a true feminist society.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And Bill Vernon.
Marion Zimmer Bradley is one of science fiction's most distinguished writers.
She's been publishing science fiction and fantasy for 30 years,
and her Darkover novels have attracted a large following of readers.
Today, there are a large number of first-class women writers in the field of science fiction.
But when Bradley began publishing in the early 1950s, there weren't many around.
In looking over a list of science fiction authors from the 40s and 50s, in fact,
it's hard to find more than a couple of women writers.
Well, there were a few more, although not really in the science fiction field.
I, of course, have always been fonder of fantasy, and there were a great many women in that.
Weird Tales was edited for many, many years by a woman, Dorothy McIlwraith.
Famous Fantastic Mysteries was edited by Mary Gnaedinger.
There were a great many women in fantasy.
It was just hard science fiction, which appealed mostly to young men and to engineering students,
or so the editors fondly believed, where women were short of taboo.
It was like the audience was supposed to be young white males,
and so it was like the audience for Western stories.
B.M. Bauer, Bertha Bauer, had to call herself just B.M. Bauer
because they believed that the young cowboys who read the stuff
would not be willing to read stuff by a person named Bertha,
which sounded like a little old lady knitting socks.
But she was one of the very best of Western writers,
and eventually they were able to cope with it and let her be so.
Bradley believes science fiction has changed in the time she's been in the field,
and she thinks women writers have been partially responsible for the changes.
We ask her what she thought some of the changes have been.
Well, part of it is when I started writing it,
it was, once again, it was sort of technological daydreams for young engineering students.
It was a lot about spaceships and journeys to the moon and the conquest of stars
and gadgets and all that sort of thing.
In the middle 40s, the work of Theodore Sturgeon and, even more, the work of the Kuttner pair,
and anybody who has read the books very seriously knows that Catherine was the dominant writer of that pair.
C.L. Moore wrote a lot of the stuff with the Kuttner pen name on it,
because, once again, the audience was supposed to be mostly male,
and the two of them were working so closely together that they never cared who wrote a specific story.
It was all just Kuttner and Moore.
But a lot of the stories that appeared with Hank's name on it were Kuttner's.
And Catherine, like many women, is more interested in the effects of gadgets on people than she was in gadgets,
and she almost single-handed reformed the whole field.
There was a time during the 40s and early 50s when the Kuttners,
when the two Kuttners wrote almost everything that appeared in the big magazines under a variety of pen names.
They'd have three or four stories in an issue sometimes.
And so, gradually, also because Hank and Catherine were both preparing to work with psychology,
they were both studying to be psychotherapists,
they became very interested in the causes of people's behavior.
This increased importance of behavior or psychology in science fiction,
which Bradley credits C.L. Moore with helping bring about,
also helps explain the popularity of fantasy today.
I think the big change has been away from technology itself
and into the effect which technology has on people.
And then when you start delving into people's minds,
what you come to is fantasy under which they cloak their deepest feelings and desires.
You might say the very depths of their unconscious where nothing is censored.
Fantasy is, you might say, the subconscious with the sensor off,
turned off, or the self-censor turned off.
Bradley's own fiction is strong in characterization and in realistic human psychology.
The people she creates are always believable and deep.
But that doesn't mean her narratives are slow.
She writes exciting science fiction.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.